<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
  <head>
    <title>Nieznany</title>
    <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
  <link href="../../stylesheet.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<link href="../../page_styles.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
</head>
  <body class="calibre4">
  <p class="calibre2">dependency injection?</p>

  <p class="calibre2">What should be stable in your system?</p>

  <h2 class="calibre5">What code to extract from a Statement to shared utility method?<br class="calibre26"/></h2>

  <h2 id="sigil_toc_id_36" class="calibre5">Why such a strange approach to create enumerated constants?</h2>

  <p class="calibre2">TODO</p>

  <h2 id="sigil_toc_id_37" class="calibre5">Expanded TDD process</h2>

  <p class="calibre2">As a little introduction, I’ll show you an expanded version of TDD flow that we’ll be using:</p>

  <ol class="calibre12">
    <li class="calibre13">Examine TODO list and pick an item that makes most sense to implement next</li>

    <li class="calibre13">Write unfulfilled Statement</li>

    <li class="calibre13">Make it unfulfilled for the right reason</li>

    <li class="calibre13">Fulfill the Statement and make sure all already fulfilled Statements are still fulfilled</li>

    <li class="calibre13">Cross out the item from TODO list</li>

    <li class="calibre13">Repeat until no item is left on the TODO list</li>
  </ol>

  <p class="calibre2">Some of the steps don’t probably mean anything to yet. Don’t worry, we’ll be reiterating them several times, so don’t try to memorize them now.</p>

  <h2 id="sigil_toc_id_38" class="calibre5">What exactly do we specify?<br class="calibre26"/></h2>

  <p class="calibre2">In this chapter, we’ll look a little bit on what it is that we actually write our specification against - what exactly do we want to describe about a class. We’re gonna jump into a quick example, because I’ve been keeping you away from practice too long now. Note that the example won’t exactly show how the real-world TDD looks like, but it will be enough to draw some conclusions and get a feel of Statement-First style of programming.</p>

  <h2 id="sigil_toc_id_39" class="calibre5">quick example (list? calculator?)</h2>

  <p class="calibre2">TODO - todo list</p>
</body>
</html>
