<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
  <title></title>
</head>

<body>
  <h1>It's Not a Test</h1>

  <p>Up to now, I was cheating on you. I told you that the little executable snippets of code are 'tests' and that they're here to 'check' or 'verify' something. Now it's time to reveal the truth.</p>

  <h2>When a test becomes something else</h2>

  <p>I studied in Łódź, a large city in the center of Poland. As probably all other students in all other countries, we've had lectures, exercises and exams. The exams were pretty hard, especially considered that my computer science group was on the faculty of electronic and electric engineering, so we had to grasp a lot of classes that didn't have anything to do with programming, for instance electrotechnics, solid-state physics or electronic and electrical metrology.</p>

  <p>Knowing that the exams were difficult and that it was hard to learn everything during preparation, the lecturers would give us exemplary exams from previous years. The questions were different than during actual exams, but the structure and types of questions asked (practice vs. theory etc.) was similar. We would usually get these exemplary questions before we started learning really hard (which was usually at the end of semester). Guess what happened then? As you might suspect, we did not use the tests we received just to 'verify' or 'check' our knowledge after we finished learning. Those tests were actually the first thing we went to before even starting to learn. Why was that so? What use were the tests when we knew we wouldn't know most of the answers?</p>

  <p>I guess my lecturers would disagree with me, but I find it quite amusing that what we were really doing back then was Lean. Lean is an approach where, among others, there's a rigorous emphasis on eliminating waste. Every feature or product that's produced while not being needed by anyone is considered waste. That's because if something's not needed, there's no reason to assume it will ever be needed. In such case the entire feature or product is a waste - it has no value. Even if it WILL be ever needed, it will require some rework anyway to fit the real customer needs. In this case, the initial amount of work that went into the parts of solution that had to be replaced by another parts anyway is a waste - it never brought any money (I'm not talking about such things as customer demos, but finished, polished features or products).</p>

  <p>So, in order to eliminate waste, there's huge pressure nowadays to "pull features from demand" instead of "pushing them" into the product. In other words, every feature is there to satisfy concrete need. If not, the effort is considered wasted and the money drown.</p>

  <p>Going back to the exams, why the approach of first looking through the exemplary tests can be considered 'lean'? That's because, when we treat passing an exam as our goal, then everything that does not put us closer to this goal is considered waste. Let's suppose the exam is theory only - why then practice the exercises? It would probably pay off a lot more to study theoretical side of the topics. Such knowledge could be obtained from those exemplary tests. So, the tests were a specification of what was needed to pass the exam, letting us pull the value (i.e. our knowledge) from demand (information obtained from tests) rather that pushing it from implementation (i.e. learning everything in a course book chapter after chapter).</p>

  <p>So the tests became something else. They became a way to specify a need by giving some examples, which helped us:</p>

  <ol>
    <li>to focus on the right value to deliver</li>

    <li>...</li>
  </ol>
</body>
</html>
