<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
  <title></title>
</head>

<body>
  <p>&nbsp;</p>

  <h2>Expanded TDD process</h2>

  <p>As a little introduction, I'll show you an expanded version of TDD flow that we'll be using:</p>

  <ol>
    <li>Examine TODO list and pick an item that makes most sense to implement next</li>

    <li>Write unfulfilled Statement</li>

    <li>Make it unfulfilled for the right reason</li>

    <li>Fulfill the Statement and make sure all already fulfilled Statements are still fulfilled</li>

    <li>Cross out the item from TODO list</li>

    <li>Repeat until no item is left on the TODO list</li>
  </ol>

  <p>Some of the steps don't probably mean anything to yet. Don't worry, we'll be reiterating them several times, so don't try to memorize them now.</p>

  <h2>A TODO list</h2>

  <p>One interesting thing to note when we look at the steps above is that we'll be maintaining a TODO list. What is it for? You'll have to see for yourself! The only thing that I'd like to tell you up-front is that the process above doesn't include a step where you add something to the TODO list. This is because you're free to expand your TODO list anytime. This can even be halfway writing your current Statement that an idea or a new behavior occurs to you. In such situation, not get distracted from your current task, you add the new item to the TODO list and get back to it later (hence the step 1 of this process).</p>

  <div>
    <br />
  </div>
</body>
</html>
