<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
  <title>We are in desperate need of rapid feedback, whether we're aware of it or not</title>
  <link href="../Styles/Global.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
  <p>Today, I was adding some code to a codebase that had no unit tests (nor did I want to write any), which I haven't done for a long time, when I caught myself taking shortcuts and hacking bastardly on the code, making it less maintainable. How did it happen?</p>

  <p>Me, who always strived (more or less successfully) for clean code and test driven development, ended up hacking all over the place.</p>

  <p>After having a tea, I figured out what happened. I desperately needed rapid feedback. Taking shortcuts and writing bad code shortened my path to production environment where I was verifying whether the change was correctly made. "Just put this hack over there and back to debugging". What's more, it reminded me the times before I got into TDD - I was doing the same then. So it's not TDD that raised my need for this feedback - it has always been there. It's just that I have become aware of it.</p>

  <p>And I think this is often the reason why knowledgeable engineers write crappy code. For them, this is a sacrifice on the altar of rapid feedback - if only they knew that by doing TDD, they would not have to sacrifice anything...</p>

  <p>It's funny how TDD is accused of being unnatural ("what? Test First? That's insane!") while at the same time satisfying our most natural need.</p>

  <p>Good night, everyone!</p>
</body>
</html>
